Chemical Proteomics: process of identifying protein targets by treating with modified small molecules (probes) which come from libraries or from phenotypic screens.

Probe: original small molecule modified with a sorting entity (eg. biotin) and a linker that connects the two.

Two basic types:
1) Classic/affinity pulldown - cell lysates incubated with either (a) bead immobilized or (b) biotinylated small molecules. (a) is washed to remove non-specific binding and then subjected to LC/MS-MS. (b) is passed through an affinity column of streptavidin beads where the biotin binds to beads and then LC-MS/MS. Success depends on the design of the probes and selection of the site on the small molecule that can withstand modification with biotin without affecting the functionality. Usually done in-vitro since the probe can't permeate the cell membrane.

2) Covalent - in the classic case above the interaction between the probe and the protein is equilibrium based and is thus prone to dissociation-based losses during affinity purification. Attaching a reactive group that can enable covalent linking of the probe to the protein stabilizes the interaction and prevents equilibrium based losses. Such probes have 3 elements - a reactive group, a selective group (small mol) and a sorting group (biotin)

3) Activity based probes (ABPs) - Enables in-vivo treatment, live cells incubated with the probes. These probes have two elements when incubated - the selective group (small mol) and a functional reporter for visualization and enrichment. The cells are then lysed and the probes are tagged with biotin through a 'click' reaction, affinity enriched and LS/MS-MS.

Details: ABPs consist of 3 basic elements: 1) a tag - to help separate and purify the bound protein. Usually biotin to enable affinity purification, but can be flourescent or radioactive. Attached through a click reaction. 2) a linker - connects 1 to 3 to prevent steric congestion and 3) a warhead - most important element (often derived from enzyme inhibitors) covalently binds to the nucleophile amino acid (usually serine or cysteine) in an enzyme's active site. 
PS: An enzymes active site usually consists of a catalytic triad - 3 amino acids, one acidic, one base and one nucleophile. The nucleophile is what attacks the substrate.

Non-specific binding is a problem in chem prot assays. One way to cut down on this is my competition - using a control where the  unmodified compound is incubated along with the probe. In bead immobilized cases, competitive elution can be done with the unmodified compound. The unmodified compound will compete with the probe and reduce the amount of protein available for the probe. Those proteins that show up in high levels in the treatment, but not in the control indicates proteins on interest. Non-specifically bound proteins will show up in more or less equal amounts in both control and treatment.

Quantitative Chemical Proteomics: by quantifying the amount of proteins bounds by the probes, eliminate non-specific binding as those will be much lower than real targets. Usually relative quantitation - probe vs control, different concentrations of probe etc. The most common method of quantitation is by labeling the proteins (certain amino acids) either by isotopes or tags. The labeling can be done either metabolically (culture cells with the labeled amino acids) or chemically after extracting the proteins. 

Commonly used methods of quant chem prot:
1) SILAC - stable isotope labeling in cell culture: 
a) Classic treatment: Cells grown in medium containing light (treatment) and heavy (control) isotopes of amino acids. Then lysed and lysate treated with free/soluble compound (treatment) or DMSO (control). Then they are combined and passed through affinity matrix that has the immobilized compound bound to the beads. The beads are then washed to release the bound proteins which are then subjected to LC-MS/MS. Peptides from both treatment and control will elute together as they are mixed and show up side by side on the spectra due to the small difference in mol wt, but the peptides that were bound by treatment with the free compound will not bind to the immobilized column and hence those will be lower in intensity when compared to control. This helps differentiate non-specific binding from specific and the difference in intensity is the relative quantity of the peptide.
b) Covalent/ABP - same as above except treatment happens in-vitro with the activiy based probe.

Multiple treatments or varying concentrations can be tried together with a 'spike-in' standard. The treatments are combined separately with the standard, click labeled, affinity pulled down and then LC-MS/MS. The difference in intensity can be seen to be more marked as the concentration of the compound increases.

2) iTRAQ - isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation. Here the peptides are labeled with a reagent *after* treatment with the compound. Chemical labeling as opposed to metabolic labeling in SILAC. The reagent contains a balancer and a reporter that together add up to the same mass, so reporter can be changed as long as balancer is also adjusted. iTRAQ reagents are usually multiplexed in 4 or 8. The reporters differ by a mass of 1 Dalton. 8 plex has MWs in the range 114-121. This multiplexing allows quantifying multiple experimental conditions (like dosage) in one MS run.
a) The treatment and control are not mixed, they are affinity pulled down separately (as before by treating with free compound/control and then running through columns with immobilized compound) and the labeled separately.  Once labeled they are mixed together and analyzed. The reporters show up in the spectra at the low end of the m/z - the small differences in mass between the treatment and control help identify them, the difference in intensity being the relative quantity of the peptide.  
b) iTRAQ can also be performed on live cells using a clickalble ABP on the cells and then click in the tag after lysis. The control in this case is either DMSO or a mix of the probe and the unmodified compound. The unmodified compound will compete with the probe  thus lowering the number of proteins that can be tagged. The treatment will be the probe (only). The lysates are tagged - the control will have a much lower number of tagged protein than the treatment. On-beads trypsin digestion is performed, peptides iTRAQ labeled and then LC-MS/MS. In this case the reporters from the control will be higher than the treatment.

Another application of quantitative chem prot is to identify the binding sites of compounds. The tag is cleaved off and then subjected to LC-MS/MS to identify the binding site.