20 Amino acids
Amino terminal, alkyl group (R) and carboxy terminal - R group key in differentiating amino acids
Non-polar hydrophobic (8/20 - Tryptophan, Phenylalanine, Methionine etc)
Polar acidic (2/20 Aspartic and Glutamic acid)
Polar basic (3/20 Lysine, Arginine, Histidine)
Polar uncharged (7/20 Glycine, Glutamine etc)

In peptides, amino acids are linked to each other by bonds between the amino group of one and the carboxyl of the next (between the N and C, losing an H2O in the process). Peptides are depicted as going from the amino terminus to the carboxyl terminus. Multiple peptides form a protein.

Proteins are digested into peptides that are approx 8-20 aa long by using an enzype trypsin that cleaves at Lysine and Arginine. In the first step of Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), the peptides are separated by mass. These peptide are then fragmented further in the second step by collision induced dissociation (CID)

Peptide fragmentation
The bonds that connect amino acids are broken by collision and you get b ions (amino terminal) and y ions (carboxy terminal)
For eg. if it is a peptide with 8 amino acids, if a collision breaks the bond between the first amino acid and the second you get b1 and y7 ions. The number indicates the number of R groups left in the ion. A third type of ion, the 'a' ion is formed from b-ions that tend to degrade by losing CO. All these ions are mixed together for a given peptide. 

Mass spectra
The spectra plots mass/charge ratio (called m/z) on x axis against intensity (peptide count) on the y-axis. Basically means how many peptides were found for a certain m/z value/range. First round of MS called MS1 will give the spectra for the entire protein. The second round MS2 does finer grain separation of selected regions (precursor ions). MS2 gives the sequence of individual peptides, with each called peak being the total weight of aas till that peak starting from one of the terminals.

Telling the mass difference between the peaks is critical for deciphering the peptide as the mass difference is equal to the mass of the individual amino acids. For eg. the peptide AEPTIR will fragment as (A, AE, AEP, AEPT, AEPTI and AEPTIR) and the difference in mass between the peaks of each fragment is the mass of the additional amino acid. In the real world, the spectra is a mix of b, y and a ions. On top of that there is noise (false signals) that make it hard to tell the peptide sequence from its spectra.

One way to do this is to compare the acquired spectra with a theoretical spectra of the DB of proteome of the organism in question. The peaks are lined up and scored. The score is XCorr which is the ratio of the Cross-correlation of the best match and auto-correlation generated by sliding the peptides along a 150 AMU (atomic mass unit) window - +75 and -75 -. The spectra with the highest XCorr is chosen as the match for each theoretical spectra.

XCorr = Cross Correlation / Avg auto-correlation along a 150 AMU window

The XCorr is an excellent measure of accuracy and is used in Sequest, the main software used for peptide identification. Another one X!Tandem uses an Evalue that estimates how good the best score is compared to the rest. Another search engine called Mascot uses theoretical p-values. 

To compare different search engines that do not share the same scoring system, the scores need to be converted to the same metric - probability. The tool PeptideProphet does this and computes actual probabilities. It does so by comparing the best match against all other best matches in the entire sample (as opposed to just that spectra). Low modes ie low scores possibly represent matches that are wrong, whereas high modes are most probably correct. PP fits the distribution into two modes - incorrect low and correct high. Some bayesian statistics calculates, for each score, the probabiltity of having that score and being correct as opposed to the probability of just having that score. This probability of being correct makes PP scores immune to between sample variations as the score is relative to the sample.

Alternatively, mass spec software can do de-novo sequencing which means it will give the sequence of the peptides without DB search. Eventually you get a list of peptide matches with associated scores and you pick the best one (highest score).

Sequence DB search:
Define a scoring function
Identify Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) between acquired spectra and a theoretical spectra based on sequence DB.

Quantitation (bottoms-up or Peptide centric)
Proteins labeled with light/heavy isotopes in control/treatment samples. Then samples mixed and total proteins extracted (at that stage differentially tagged) -> digested into peptides -> separation by MS/MS. In a given spectra, the differntially labeled peptides will show up separately and the intensities (peptide count) will show quantities of control and treatment.

---------------------------
Ions are separated by their mass to charge ratio and that helps determine how many ions there are.
Two main methods for identifying proteins:
1) Peptide Mass Fingerprinting - digest a pure protein proteolytically and look at the m/z of all the peptides. Quick, but not used much anymore because it can't handle complex protein mixtures (which is what most biosamples are)
2) Peptide sequencing by Tandem MS (MS/MS) - first mass analyzer will separate the peptides by m/z, second will analyze specific m/z that have been fragmented. Breaks down the peptide into pieces and deduce sequence from what aa is missing in the fragments.

Top down proteomics - no proteolytic digestion of proteins before MS But this is a relatively small fraction of proteomic analysis. Most MS analyses involve digestion of proteins.

ESI - the peptides coming out of the LC column are pushed through a very fine needle that creates a spray, the droplets are ionized by the voltage applied between the LC and MS and then passes on to the mass analyzer.

Commonly used mass analyzers:
1) Quadrupole (ions pass through a column which has 4 rods, 2 +ve and 2 -ve, the charges of which can be varied. Basically allows only a certain window of m/z to go through and hit the detector)
2) Time of Flight (TOF - laser ionized particles travel through a vaccum, smaller m/z travels faster than larger ones and hit the detector)
3) Ion Trap eg. Orbitrap (ions travel into the orbitrap on a linear velocity and then spins around the core of the orbitrap - the way in which they spin is directly correlated to the m/z ratio)

Fragmentation: Collision induced dissociation

Quantification methods:
Absolute - abundance of proteins in a given sample
Relative - difference in abundance between samples. MS is much more reliable for this. The following are some different kinds of relative quantitation

1. Stable isotope labeling methods - label with isotopes that will show a distinct shift in the spectra of labeled vs unlabeled
	ICAT - Isotope Coded Affinity Tags
	SILAC - Stable Isotipe Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (incubating cells with heavy isotopes of Lysine and Arginine). Single MS.
	iTRAQ - isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (in more detail below). MS/MS.
	TMT - Tandem Mass Tag

2. Selective Reaction monitoring
	Employed when we already know what proteins we are looking for, hence not applicable in a proteomics setting.

3. Label free methods:
	Spectral counting - by counting the number of peptides that align to a known protein and using that as a measure of the quantity of the protein.
	Peak integration - area under the curve. iBAQ - Intensity based absolute quantitation (adjusts for experimental condition based variations in spectral counting)

iTRAQ: Reporter group + Balance group tagged the amino reactive end of peptides (usually onto lysine). R+B groups add upto about the same mass, so those peptides elute together. Multiplexed as 4 or 8. There are usually 4 different reporter groups which increase the mass of the peptide in increments of 1 Dalton each. The balance groups are correspondingly smaller to keep the mass the same. First MS doesn't show any differences - the difference is apparent only when the labeled peptide goes through fragmentation. At that stage the reporters cleave off and their spectra will be 1 Da apart. The intensity of the reporters indicate the amount of peptide.

---------------------------
SDS-PAGE 
First step in the whole process - protein samples along with size marker separated on PAGE using 1% SDS buffer, stained using coomassie blue. Top band around 250KDa, bottom is 16KDa. Slices containing the bands are sliced out and further processed by extraction and trypsin digestion. This digested mixture is then passed to an HPLC column from which it is injected into a mass spec through ESI.