Drugs act on mutliple targets (target proteins), not just the one it is designed to act on. Understanding these multi-target effects and awareness of biological networks lead to the concept of network pharmacology. This relies on many 'omics strategies to detect variables at the cellular/molecular level. The importance of PPIs and PTMs pushes proteomics to have a prominent role in drug discovery. Drugs generally act on proteins that do not act in isolation but are part of networks and pathways where they are connected with other proteins both physically and functionally. Dramatic progress in proteomic technologies, including innovative separation and analytical strategies such as LC-MS/MS (LC Tandem mass spectrometry) and quantitative MS measurements have also helped the advance of proteomics.

Proteomic methodologies:
2D Gel electrophoresis allows the separation of proteins by charge as first dimension and mass as second. After separation and staining statistical software can compare protein spots of different samples. The spots of interest (that appear differently in the samples) are cut out, digested in gel and the peptides identified by MS. The acquired mass data undergo a sequence database search with a score based on percentage of sequence coverage and number of peptides matched. Gel based methods have some limitations. Small (<10 kDa), large (>150 kDa) and low expressed proteins are hard to detect. Since spots usually have multiple proteins with different propeties (hydrophobic, high MW, extremely acidic and basic) that also presents a challenge. It is possible to load multiple samples (upto 3-4) in the same gel after labeling the proteins with different fluorescent dyes and measure the intensities to compare.

MS based methods are more robust for quantitation in complex samples. Proteins in solution are enzymatically cleaved into peptides which are then separated by LC before MS/MS identification. When samples are extremely biologically complex, they have to separated by 2D chromatography before MS/MS (2D-LC-MS/MS). MudPIT (multi dimensional protein identification technology) is the most common of this approach.

Roles for proteomics in the different steps to drug discovery:
1) Identifying the full spectrum of protein targets of a given drug
2) Elucidating MOA through which a drug exerts its pharmacological effect
3) Identifying biomarkers that can be used to monitor the effect of the drug in-vivo

Protein basics:
DNA transcribed to RNA by RNA Polymerase. Starts at the START codon and finishes at STOP codon to generate a 'transcript'. 5' end of transcript is capped with a single G attached so that 3' end of it is exposed. 3' end has a polyA tail with hundreds of adenosines. Exonucleases target the 5' end, so a 3' cap at the 5' end protects the transcript from degradation. Coding regions of genes (which are transcribed into mRNA transcripts) contain both exons (that code for peptides) and introns (intervening sequences). Introns need to be removed prior to translation. The process of splicing excises the exons and joins them together - this also generates diversity since the exons are spliced and joined differently. Thus a single gene can code for multiple proteins.
Intended variation
- One gene can code for multiple proteins, makes coding more efficient, allows for modular evolution
Abnormal variation
- Some alternative splicing is unintended, can result in disease for example: DNMT splicing variant is associated with cancer

A mature/final transcript is translated into a protein by ribosomes. 
Three phases:
Initiation
Elongation
Termination
Initiation of translation begins with the 40S ribosomal subunit, the e1F2, e1F3, and e1F4 factors binding with the first tRNA (for Methionine, typically). This complex binds the mRNA at the 5’ cap and scans for the START (AUG) codon. Once the START is found the 60s ribosomal subunut attaches, releasing the cofactors.
Elongation - The ribosome contains two sites which can accept tRNAs: 
P (peptidyl) site
A (acceptor) site
After initiation, the initiator tRNA resides in the P site, leaving the A site open for the next tRNA. Each tRNA has an anticodon site which can recognize exactly one codon on the mRNA. When the appropriate tRNA enters the A site, a peptide bond is formed between the first amino acid attached to the initiator tRNA in the P site and the amino acid connected to the tRNA in the A
site. The peptide bond is formed between the carboxyl (C) group of the first amino acid and the amino (N) group of the incoming amino acid, and releases a water molecule. This process then ratchets forwards the mRNA, moving the tRNA from the A site to the P site, opening  up the A site for the next appropriate tRNA.
The elongation process continues until the ribosome encounters a STOP codon, which is recognized by a universal release co-factor, terminating the extension of the peptide chain.

Protein Identification
Order to identify and characterize proteins we use a variety laboratory techniques. 
These techniques are always based on properties that are shared, but different, between proteins:
Size
Charge
Sequence
Shape
The resulting data types are then used in a variety of bioinformatics pipelines

Protein Separation
One of the simplest forms of characterization begins with the separation of proteins from a mixture
E.g. cell lysate:  all proteins in a cell can be precipitated
Next we have to separate them from each other so that we can begin to identify and characterize them
In gel separation, proteins are placed in one end of a semi-permeable matrix, typically a gel, and made to run from one end to another by applying an electrical charge
Depending on the porosity of the gel, smaller proteins will travel faster – thus farther – down the gel, separating the proteins by size
Size as well as charge can have an impact. Charge comes from the amino acid R groups!
As do many other properties used to separate and characterize proteins

PAGE stands for Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
Can be used to separate proteins OR DNA.
Can separate native (non-denatured) or denatured proteins
Proteins are typically denatured using SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), which eliminates any conformation differences – effectively “balling” up the proteins so that separation is exclusively based on size and charge

A very common method for separating proteins by electrophoresis uses a discontinuous polyacrylamide gel as a support medium and Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) to denature the proteins. The method is called Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Alternatively, a chemical denaturant may be added to remove this structure and turn the molecule into an unstructured molecule whose mobility depends only on its length and mass-to-charge ratio. This procedure is called SDS-PAGE. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) is a method of separating molecules based on the difference of their molecular weight.

In a typical PAGE gel, there are many lanes (like swim lanes in a pool). 
One lane is reserved for the marker, which is a calibrated substance that is used as a size reference
The other lanes contain various samples
A stain or dye must be used to visualize the location of the protein bands
In the “bad” old days radioisotopes were used

Sample preparation begins by treating the protein samples with SDS
SDS breaks the disulfide bonds that form higher order structure in a protein
The resulting proteins are all essentially globular
Samples are then loaded onto the gel and voltage applied
Proteins move away from the – charged cathode and towards the + charged anode buffer
After running for the required length of time, the gel is visualized – usually with coomassie blue, which binds the proteins.

Gels can be run in one dimension (separating from top to bottom)
Gels can optionally be run in 2 dimensions (first do a 1D run as described, then rotate the gel 90 degrees and repeat) for better separation
When you see that a protein is 65kDa, for example, that means that it is 65 kilo-Daltons in size, and will “run” on the gel to the same distance as the equivalent 65kDa marker

Gel Blotting
The contents (in this case the proteins) on a gel can be transferred to nitrocellulose filter paper for further analysis
This simply requires placing the gel and the filter paper in contact under pressure and allowing the contents of the gel to wick into the filter paper
This can be sped up using an electrical charge system similar to that used for the gel separation

Protein Blots
Once transferred to the nitrocellulose, additional analysis can be done to see what will bind to the protein bands
For a protein blot this is typically called a Western, SouthWestern, or Eastern Blot
Once the proteins are transferred to the nitrocellulose the blot is blocked
An agent is bound to the rest of the nitrocellulose to prevent the “probe” from absorbing into the blot. Now the blot can be probed. A probe is the desired factor that you want to see if your protein binds, e.g. another protein or an antibody, or even specific DNA fragments if you are looking for a promotor, for example.

ELISA stands for  Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
Similar to a Western Blot
Used to detect either a specific protein OR a specific antibody
Presence of the protein or antibody in question induces a color change caused by the enzyme used in the assay
Useful for looking for pathogens

Similar to PAGE, chromatography allows for the separation of proteins based on properties
Invented in 1900 by Mikhail Semjonowitsch Tswett for the separation of leaf pigments
Proteins are bound to a solid support and then eluted from the column using methods that separate them based on their properties
Different types (separation based on):
Basic (interaction with the stationary and mobile/solvent phase)
Ion-exchange (charge)
Gel-filtration (size)
Hydrophobic-interaction (hydrophobicity)
Affinity (binding partners/antibody bound to column matrix) - bind/wash(away non-bound proteins)/elute(bound target protein)

Mass spectrometry (MS)
is an analytical technique that ionizes chemical species and sorts the ions based on their mass-to-charge ratio. In simpler terms, a mass spectrum measures the masses within a sample. It is used in many different fields and is applied to pure samples as well as complex mixtures. In addition to their size and other properties (e.g. hydrophobicity, charge, binding characteristics), we can identify proteins using this method.

Can be used on purified or non-purified protein mixes!
Identifies proteins based on size of fragments

Types of Mass Spectrometry
The different types of Mass Spectroscopy are determined based on the type of Mass Analyzers used and are listed below. 
Magnetic defelection
Electrostatic
Time-of-flight (TOF)
Quadrupole

MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry
In the recent years Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization-Time Of Flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) has emerged as a potential tool for microbial identification and diagnosis. During the MALDI-TOF MS process, microbes are identified using either intact cells or cell extracts. 
All protein mass spectroscopy involves ionization of the proteins
In MALDI-TOF this is accomplished by embedding the proteins in a solid matrix and exciting them with a laser to ionize them
For mass protein identification, the proteins are first broken into smaller peptide fragments using proteolysis (e.g. trypsin)
This can be done to a single protein or to a mixture of many different proteins!

Once the proteins are digested into smaller fragments and ionized, they are exposed to an electrical field which literally “shoots” the ions away from the matrix, towards a detector
This is where the TOF part comes in: Time of Flight
Heavier fragments travel shorter distances
Lighter fragments travel longer distances
A detector identifies how many “hits” at each possible mass there are
It generates a “mass peptide fingerprint” showing how many hits of each possible mass there were in that sample. The “hard” part of MALDI-TOF is turning the mass numbers back into actual proteins.
This is called Peptide Mass Fingerprinting
Computationally intensive
Looks at all fragments and their frequencies and is able to infer the actual full-size proteins in the original mix based on fragment assembly
MASCOT: Typically uses SwissProt as the standard protein mass database
